[music]
>> Since the founding of our democracy,
there's [music] been a separation of
powers to check the executive branch.
The Senate in particular was created to
act as this kind [music] of stabilizing
force with its own important
responsibilities.
But after almost a year of the second
Trump presidency,
>> [music]
>> during which he's pursued an aggressive
agenda, the Senate is arguably much
weaker,
>> [music]
>> which could have profound effects on our
democracy.
>> [snorts]
>> So today I'm having a different kind of
conversation than we usually do on the
show,
>> [music]
>> a round table about the state of the
Senate with three lawmakers who all
decided to leave [music] office. Jeff
Flake, a Republican, represented Arizona
and left office in 2019. There is no
future with Trumpism. Joe Manchin
represented West Virginia, first as a
Democrat who frequently voted with
Republicans, and later as a registered
independent. He left the Senate at the
start of this [music] year. I was not
elected to take a side. I was elected to
represent all sides. And Tina Smith is a
Democrat who currently represents
Minnesota and recently announced that
she won't be seeking re-election in
2026. [music]
After 20 years of hard and rewarding
work in the public sector, I'm ready to
spend more time with my family. So I
wanted to gather [music] these three to
get their read on the state of the
Senate and our politics and democracy
more broadly. [music]
Here's my conversation with Senators
Flake, Manchin,
>> [music]
>> and Smith.
I want to thank you all for being here.
It is a great pleasure to have you here
on this sort of
gray winter day in Washington DC. You
are all three former or soon-to-be
former senators, and you all left at
different periods of the last 10 years.
>> [snorts]
>> And I'm hoping, frankly, that because
you are
leaving or have left, you will feel a
little bit more unleashed in being able
to discuss your true feelings and
thoughts. That's why we left.
>> [laughter]
>> Um so I I want to start by asking you
all to give me a word or a sentence,
something brief,
that describes the state you think the
Senate is in right now. And I want to
start with you, Senator Smith, because
you are actually sitting in said body.
Broken.
Senator Flake?
Probably retreat. Uh you know, in this
system uh
presidency just
by virtue of the system gains more power
over time.
But what's been frustrating is to see
the Senate just willingly give up
Article 1 authority. Abdication. They've
They've abdicated basically
responsibilities of what what their
purpose of being there. The Senate is
the most unusual body in the world. Our
framers designed it to be that way, and
and it was ingrained in me the
filibuster is the only thing. It's the
holy grail of keeping us talking and
working and becoming friends.
Jeff being on the Republican side, Tina
and I at the time on the Democrat side,
but we were all friends because we
wanted to get things done.
And we knew the Senate was the place to
do it, and they've abdicated that type
of responsibilities. I mean, those are
all pretty
bleak words, I think.
>> [laughter]
>> Uh describe the state of the Senate.
>> us to You want us to call them cowards
or what what
>> [laughter]
>> What do you want us to say, Luther? I
want you to say what you think.
Pretty straightforward responses here,
it seems. That's good.
>> responses, and not
terribly optimistic. Senator Flake, when
you left the Senate
>> Right.
you had been serving in Congress for 18
years,
um first as a representative.
In a speech you gave on the floor, you
gave this warning, and I'm going to
quote here, "Let us recognize
as authoritarianism reasserts itself in
country after country, that we are by no
means immune."
Do you think you were right to be
concerned? Yes, most definitely. I'm not
saying that we're under an authoritarian
system now, we're not. Um but that
tendency and certainly Congress has
abdicated its responsibility on a number
of areas, whether it's war powers,
whether it's tariffs,
uh you know, issues that rightly belong
in the Senate, and senators have
typically over time jealously guarded
their prerogative.
>> [snorts]
>> Uh but they have willingly kind of given
that up, and you have a president who is
eager to take just about everything he
can get. Now, every president,
Republican or Democrat, will push some
limits somewhere in terms of executive
orders. Uh this president is doing that
in spades, obviously. And so
but that's why you need a Senate willing
to stand up, and we've seen inklings
lately that you might see some of that
coming. But boy, it's it's been it's
been long in coming, and I was concerned
then. I'm I'm more concerned today.
Senator Manchin,
just before you left the Senate, you
turned away from the Democrats. You
registered as an independent. And in
some of your final words, you called the
Democratic brand toxic.
Have you seen anything lately that has
changed your mind on the direction of
the Democratic Party? Well, first of
all, my state's an R40 state. There's
not a redder state than mine. And it got
to the point where the people in West
Virginia, when you have a total working
class people coming from the lower
echelon of the financial rung, okay?
Hardworking poor people. Why did they
all leave the Democrat Party? It's kind
of left them behind, and really, if you
want to know
the underlying
uh motive was that a lot of these people
would tell me they said, "Joe, listen,
the Washington Democratic Party
basically has spent more effort,
resources, and time
for able-bodied, capable people that
should be working, that don't work or
won't work, than those of us who do. And
I've had enough.
I can't go home and explain what we're
doing as far as the Democratic Party. So
I people that are still Democrats in my
state, I just says, "You better make
sure they understand you're an
independent West Virginia Democrat."
Cuz if you get tagged as a Washington
Democrat, you're underwater 15, 20
points before you start. I mean, that's
a warning to the party, for sure.
>> Well, I tried to be as nice as I can, as
I tried to be as truthful as I can,
because in some states, they some blue
and and really blue areas, they still
can survive and still have a strong, you
know, New York City and different places
like that may be still strong. But I can
tell you, if you want to know why you'll
never be in the majority again, cuz
you're losing most of the working rural
areas.
And that is what has happened.
All right, Senator Smith, I'm going to
turn to you because you've said you're
stepping down to spend more time with
family, and that it has nothing to do
with politics.
Um
a lot of politicians who leave say that,
and that [laughter] is the classic line.
>> Come on, tell the truth.
When I say I want to spend more time
with my family, I actually mean it, cuz
I really like my family. Yeah,
but I've also said a few other things
about why I'm it can be for personal
reasons, but there's always professional
reasons.
I you know, I noted that Representative
Jared Golden, um who is also stepping
down from the house, he talked about the
sort of political nastiness and the
political violence that we're seeing for
reasons that he's not seeking
re-election. So I'm just wondering,
are are those issues weighing on you,
too? You know, I made the decision not
to run for re-election, you know, in
January
December, January of 2024,
2025, and then everything that has
happened this year has certainly not
made me wonder whether I made the right
decision. I mean, I had
you know, this horrible um political
assassination of my dear friend Melissa
Hortman, the speaker of the min- the
emerita of the Minnesota House. We had
the shooting of the Annunciation School,
which is literally 10 blocks from where
I live. And so the uh the reality of
these political attacks, and of course
this year, in this moment, um fueled by
the president of the United States, who
just a couple of weeks ago um said that
two of my colleagues and four members of
the House of Representatives should be
tried for treason and executed. Of
course these things all have impact. But
yeah, there was another part of it for
me, which is that um I'm going to I'm
what is my 68, roughly? I will be 68
next
>> young for a Democratic Senator. Yes, it
is.
Yes, it is. That's on the low end
[laughter] of the spectrum, I guess.
>> I I I you know, I am not burdened by the
belief that I am the only one who can do
this job. I feel really confident in the
the bench that is there in Minnesota to
carry on, and I'm actually quite
invigorated by making space for those
leaders to to step in.
>> [laughter]
>> When I left, I I I didn't I never said I
want to spend more time with family. I
love my family, but
>> [laughter]
>> I would have I would have liked to have
served another term. I mean, you you
don't get all the way to the most
exclusive club in the world and just
want to stay one term. So I would have
liked to, but the price for doing so
Yeah, I know what you mean. Yeah, it
would have been for me to say, "You
know, those principles I said I believed
in, I no longer do."
And that that the cost, the price for
that was too steep to pay.
Jeff, those of us who've been in these
tough races before,
when you're facing something, you know
what's going to turn you into a
different animal than you're not. It's
not I know you, and I know Tina. That's
not who we are, I don't think. But we
would have had to turn into another
animal if we wanted to go on. I've never
faced an election where I thought the
other side was an enemy.
I learned from every election I was in
the debate, and after the election was
over, I I won most of them, so I'd call
the person. I said, "You know, you had
some good ideas in that debate." I said,
"Can we talk about that?" and start
building relationships. That's gone.
I'll say that's not in vogue now, but I
don't think it's gone.
>> [laughter]
>> I think I think that's right. I don't
think that's right. I don't think it's
gone, either. And I haven't given up
hope on that, Joe. I I believe that it's
still
that it's still there.
>> give up. I'm just I'm I'm I'm just
dealing with reality today. The thing
that I see Jeff and you can talk about
this. You came from the house. I came
from being a governor, which is the most
collegial of all institutions. You can
go to a governor's National Governor's
Association. If I didn't know that that
person was a Republican Democrat, you
could not tell the difference. We're all
working for the same curing the same
problems.
The house, you all operate on simple
majority 218, okay? Don't even have to
acknowledge the other side. Don't even
have to let them in in be involved if
you don't want to. Okay?
I kept noticing more and more
congresspeople that kept coming to the
Senate with that mindset made it harder
for the Senate
to stay collegiate. Oh, definitely.
>> Am I right?
>> Yes, completely. I mean it was the the
real turn in the house came
2005, 6. I I got there in 2001.
Uh when we didn't adopt formally, but
basically live by the the so-called
Hastert rule. And it wasn't Hastert, it
was really Tom DeLay and a few others
who basically said if you're going to
bring something to the floor as a
Republican, and we had a bigger cushion
at that time in the majority, but that
you should be able to pass it just with
Republican votes.
And and if it might gather bipartisan
support, then, you know, knock some
provisions off so it won't be
attractive. And then you use that as a
cudgel during the next election. And and
and that, you know, you had people
kind of mature as politicians, I guess,
under that system. And some of them have
gone to the Senate.
>> I mean, this is what Mitch McConnell
said. Like our my purpose is to beat
Obama. And and gradually, um the that I
mean, the partisanship just ramped up.
So,
you know, it's funny listening to you
all. Um
and it's one of the reasons I wanted to
bring you here because you have the long
view of how we got here. And and
clearly,
um all of this predates
the era that we're in now. But this era
has supercharged
all of what you're discussing.
You've touched on one of the main
critiques of the Senate right now. And
it's something I heard when I sat with
um Senator Lisa Murkowski, which is that
the Senate is now,
regardless of the
partisan nature, it's just not doing its
job. Um it's not acting as a check on
the executive. And
I would love for you to just discuss, do
you think that this is an enduring shift
away from congressional power?
I don't think it's an enduring
condition. I think it has to do with
leadership. I I look at the potential
field on the Democratic and Republican
side and and uh you see some who will
try to, you know,
replicate what President Trump has done
in terms of amassing power and just kind
of stiffing the House and the Senate.
But the vast majority of Republican
senators, who I'm most familiar with,
don't like this
>> [laughter]
>> at all.
They want to reassert their
prerogatives. They know that the Senate,
you know, has the reputation of being
the world's most deliberative body and
they'd like to get back to deliberating.
So, I I I do think that this isn't a
condition that that has to stay. But
we've never seen a time when
presidential powers have been given
back. The president as I was saying
before.
>> the Supreme Court ruling on this and and
it's making it, you know, law
essentially. Yeah, but that that the
president has amassed far more power and
is using far more power than the Supreme
Court has granted him now.
>> It's not been codified. And uh yes, so
you'll
I think it's you know, my sense of it is
that I completely agree with Jeff that
you you know, you behind the scenes you
will hear many Republicans in the Senate
say,
um I don't like this. I don't think this
is right.
But then they also say, we're just
waiting for the right moment.
We're wait we're waiting for the right
moment to actually do something about
it. And meanwhile, the powers of the
Senate and the powers of the legislative
branch are are um I mean, they're
they're they're gushing out of the
capital. I mean, and it's not just the
Senate. I mean, what the speaker did to
keep the US House of Representatives out
of session for how many days was it? You
know, seven weeks um was was really um
an incredible abdication of
responsibility and authority. And so, I
um
I think that it's interesting to me cuz
I I'm always so fascinated by the
interpersonal relationships of everybody
in the Senate. And the people that I see
that seem to feel the most betrayed
right now are my Democratic colleagues
who staked their careers on working
across party lines to accomplish thing.
They were part of the gangs. They were
in the the, you know, so much of the
work that you did, Joe, around the
infrastructure act. And and and they
they feel as if the bonds of trust
between Democrats and Republicans have
been so broken because of the ways in
which Republicans in the Senate have
just basically kowtowed to the
president. Not only on the, you know, on
the fact of basically allowing him to
undo our budget bills, um but I mean, on
the ways that they've kind of confirmed
against their better judgment, I would
argue, some of these really terrible
nominees like RFK Jr. and like, you
know, the Secretary of Defense. So, part
of the problem, I believe, this is where
I think Joe and I differ, maybe we we I
differ from both of my colleagues here.
I think that the Senate rules have so
completely stymied the ability of the
Senate to do anything that um and I'm
not just talking about the filibuster. I
think there's going to be you know,
there's got to be a way of figuring out
how to make the systems of the Senate
work better.
>> Cuz you'd like to get rid of the
filibuster. I mean, I would at least
like to reform it so that if you're
going to filibuster a bill, you ought to
at least have to stand on the damn floor
and talk instead of just instead of just
saying, oh, I don't like this, so I'm
going to I'm going to object and then,
you know, go out for dinner. Every
president who has a majority
is going to want to get rid of the
filibuster. And every Senate ought to
resist that,
Republican or Democrat, because it is
one of the few mechanisms left that
forces people to work together.
>> I've watched the Senate for the last 8
years and I have not seen that the
filibuster is the pill to cure
partisanship.
What I see is that
partisanship is in I mean, sometimes,
certainly, the need to find a 60-vote
majority creates strong pieces of
legislation like the infrastructure and
jobs act. But sometimes it it creates
the very systems that make it very
difficult for the things that Americans
want to get done to actually get done. I
want to come back to this. But but
before we do, I am curious about
the problem of party leadership.
Because,
for example, Senator Chuck Schumer, the
Senate minority leader, isn't popular
with the Democratic base.
And Senator Smith, you are part of a
so-called fight club that is looking to
get new leadership.
I mean, can you explain what you think
is needed? And is the leadership of the
respective parties part of what's going
on here? In a in a functioning
legislative body, you would think that
the Democratic leader and the Republican
leader would talk to each other all the
time, right? To try to figure things
out, try to try to get things going. The
level of partisanship in the Senate is
at such a degree that
that that it just doesn't happen
anymore. The this informal group that I
am a part of are really is a it's a
group of senators who have been
complaining and unhappy primarily with
the ways in which
the leader has been identifying what
candidates he wants to run in what
states. It has been primarily about
that, kind of like how the elections
of the and and of the work of the DSCC
has been working.
>> to Senator Schumer, um he touted that as
his greatest sort of strength, that he
really can choose um candidates that
that win. And so, you know, you get a
Governor Janet Mills running in Maine at
77 um against Golden Flake who's 41 and
and more progressive. And so, you know,
that sets up an intraparty fight. Yes, I
think it does. To be clear, I haven't
endorsed anybody in Maine, but I I
haven't endorsed anybody in Minnesota
yet either because I think that it
should be up to the voters to decide.
>> I'm endorsing Susan Collins in Maine.
Okay. Yeah. They get rid of a Susan
Collins, then you're really losing the
Senate. The people that have that
mindset, we can't even get them to run
anymore. Good good people on the merit.
You know, if you look at the Senate, and
you mentioned Chuck Schumer, and some
people look at them and say they're too
partisan to get anything done, they
won't ever reach across the aisle.
Well, they have in the past. I was part
of the Gang of Eight with Chuck Schumer
and Dick Durbin. Yes, on the
immigration. We passed a bill 60 to 32.
That was one of the last examples we've
seen of the Senate working how it used
to work. My point is, some of the same
characters that we now look at and say,
they could never do this, they can and
they have in the past, but the
incentives are so misaligned right now.
>> I'm wondering what you think of
Republican leader um John Thune, who
broadly people view him as being less
obsequious to Trump, right? That um
he's not exactly like Speaker of the
House Johnson, according to critics who
really takes everything that he's doing
from the White House.
That said, he has been accused of sort
of chipping away at the filibuster by
allowing a number of simple majority
votes, ushering in what the New Yorker
called the age of Senate irrelevance.
So, Senator Flake, I mean,
why do you think he's so weak? Is he so
weak?
Well, I I think when I mentioned before
that there are still a core of
Republican senators who want the Senate
to be like it used to be, like a
deliberative body, and not have the
president control that.
He's one of them. And he's an
But when John Thune said the other day,
when the president you know said get rid
of the filibuster, John Thune's response
was, we don't have the votes, which is
true. I would have liked him to say,
that's a terrible idea, Mr. President,
[laughter] we're not going to do it. So
yeah, from the outside I I certainly am
frustrated sometimes when they won't
just say, you know, what they're going
to do or on tariffs, actually pull your
power back there. And certainly get
ahead of the Supreme Court. You don't
want to see, you know, you're weak
enough with the president, you don't
want to be weak and and follow what the
Supreme Court does or have them fight
your battles for you. So
I yeah, I'm frustrated sometimes, but I
I do think that he he certainly is a
senator that is
in some ways and often doing the best he
can given the political situation
to get the Senate back. And I I think
under What is the reason he's not
pulling his power back though? Why I
mean, he is the Senate majority leader.
Why isn't he doing it? Well, he's
cautious. I guess he's looking at his
caucus.
>> and you you get angry tweets every day
if you if you do. I know that's yes, oh
definitely. And so that that's
difficult, but right now up to now the
president has been able to in any
Republican seat in the country say, I
can get a primary opponent for you if
you don't do what I say. That's a
powerful political incentive.
We may like it to be different,
but that's the incentive structure that
most of my former colleagues are working
under. They don't like it, but they're
in it now. I've come to the conclusion,
there's two things that will change that
would change politics in America. First
as far as in Congress would be term
limits.
And I never was I never
10-15 years ago I would have never been
supportive of term limits, okay?
And I was at a rally one time and I had
a I was governor, had a big town hall
rally. The lady got up in the back, she
says, boy Joe, she says, we wish you
were for term limits. And I said to her,
I said to Suzy, I said, Suzy, I said, I
understand where you're coming from. I
said, but you're going to lose a lot of
the institutional knowledge you have and
power and this and that and that and all
these good people. She said, think of
this, Joe. If we had term limits, maybe
we'd get one good courageous term out of
you. Maybe you'd be willing to do the
right thing. At least one good term from
you. She sold me. I couldn't I didn't
have any argument back. I said, fine.
And I've been for it ever since. And
open primaries. And I'll give you an
example of open primaries. Our friend
Lisa Murkowski would not get elected
through the primary process in Alaska if
it wasn't for the rank choice voting or
open primaries. When you can control
primary, and that's what gives President
Trump or gives a Democrat president the
power in a real blue state or red state,
knowing that they have that power to
name who they want or primary you or
this or that. An open primary, boom, you
know, you're out there, the best will
succeed.
>> Yeah, if you had five or six states with
open primary laws like Alaska has, that
would create a whole different power
structure in the Senate.
>> Well, here, you're you're a perfect
example of that because in what your
type of primaries in Arizona are what?
Yeah, if we had the the Alaska style
thing, then I would have run for
re-election.
>> There you go. Let me give you the
counterpoint though to this
dream of of bipartisanship, which is
did we get here perhaps
because
the Senate's been ineffective at
responding to the real problems that
voters have?
Because essentially
it's incremental. There just not any big
swings anymore. I mean, people at the
moment seem to be clamoring for these
ideas that can solve their very real
problems. Does incrementalism
which can read as bipartisanship,
actually get the job done at a moment
like like this?
>> this is exactly the issue. If you look
at Americans over the last probably
what, 20-30 years, significant
majorities of Americans have said that
they think that things are terribly on
the wrong track. That they're they're
working as hard as they possibly can and
nothing is really changing. And so like
if you have a governing body that isn't
capable, hasn't been capable of making
the big changes that need to be made, of
course people are going to be
frustrated. And what I think is so
interesting cuz we often kind of get
sucked into this sort of is this you
know, are you moderate or you
progressive? Like where do you fall in
the continuum? I actually don't think
that's the right continuum at all. I
think it's a question of whether you
actually think that the status quo is
pretty much working or that you think
that it needs to be fundamentally
changed. And Americans are telling us
that the status quo is not working for
them. And they're telling us that things
that maybe would be seen as being like
progressive, it's actually like 75%
issues.
Paid family and medical leave, child
care that people can afford, raise the
minimum wage. I mean, even Medicare for
all, which has been seen as being
incredibly radical, a majority of
Americans want to see a complete
revamping of our health care system. So
all of that argues to me that we need a
body, a Senate and a Congress that's
capable of making those kinds of big
changes. I make the case for in
incrementalism. I'm a
being a conservative means
preserving conservative or institutions
that work. And and the Senate has worked
over time. And so incrementalism is what
you want. That's why I like the
filibuster for example, because you it
it it helps, doesn't
cure it completely, but it helps from
having wide swings of, you know, popular
opinion
back and forth like you have in the
house. And that has served the country
well. So I don't think that that's the
problem. I think I I look at
Joe Manchin was always in the middle of
every bipartisan fight. Every bill that
looked for bipartisan support saying,
hey,
compromise is the coin coin of the realm
here. Because you don't want to have
these wide swings.
>> You know, there used to be an old
saying, you're guilt by
association. If someone was a bad actor
and you you're working or talking to
them, they think, well, you must support
that. Now it's guilt by conversation.
You can't even be seen having a
conversation with someone who might not
be on the same. That is so ridiculous to
me that I never did subscribe. And the
Democrats chastised me for working
across. I mean, I think that there's
this perception that those people who
are fortunate enough in a closely
divided Senate to wield a lot of power
because they
>> I don't recommend that on anybody.
I do not recommend it. But if it
happens, be ready.
>> [laughter]
>> Fair. But the they sit in this position
and they are obstructing
I'm giving you the counterargument.
obstructing
actual progress. I mean, you've seen
James Carville, the long-time Democratic
strategist, who is self-described as a
centrist, obviously worked for Bill
Clinton. And he recently argued that for
example, Democrats need to run on and
presumably eventually legislate on, and
I'm going to quote her, a sweeping,
aggressive, unvarnished, unapologetic,
and altogether unmistakable platform of
pure economic rage.
When I was when I read what James
Carville said, I was thinking about how,
you know, my view of it is that the the
for the last 10 years I think the
Democratic Party, the National
Democratic Party, has been kind of stuck
in a it's like we're stuck in a bad
relationship. We've so defined ourselves
by being opposed to Trump that we have
not
it's like we've forgotten how to do the
other part of our job, which is to put
forward an aggressive, strong, positive
vision of, you know, that is about where
we think the country ought to go. And I
think we need to break up with this old
relationship that we have, and we need
to be much more bold about what it is
that we're what we're proposing. And I
think that's what Carville is getting
at.
>> Well, when I hear economic rage,
I
you know, that kind of suggests that
that's this very leftist far left
platform Mondami kind of thing. That's
that's what it it speaks to me.
And I hope the Democrats don't do that
because
>> be able to
we ought to be able to meet the needs of
Americans where they what and what they
want and that is what has been that's
not been happening. Well, I don't
disagree with your
immigration overreach. I think it is
significantly. You know, I talk about
going after criminals. Everybody wants
that
but he's gone far beyond that every
president coming in exaggerates the
mandate that they were given and they're
usually given a whooping in the midterm
elections coming up almost always. This
time it'll be significant. I think and
so you'll you'll have now a period of
divided government
which I as a fiscal conservative
concerned about debt and whatever else
I'm looking forward to divided
government is generally more fiscally
prudent government but it also And maybe
it inspires that that's cooperation
and compromise is needed.
>> Precisely because no president thinks
that they can get it all.
They may be able to get all
what they think they're going to get for
a couple of years but then the pendulum
swings and and we're seeing that swing
in a big way and that's I wrote a piece
the other day called the the great
migration has begun GOP migration
migration. We're seeing that now. We're
seeing it in a you know, in a few things
Marjorie Taylor Greene a few outliers.
>> There's cracks in the facade, right?
There are there are but but now when
people realize that
you know, this is it's popular now to be
against the president on a couple of
issues and they will need to in order to
survive some of these generals coming up
you you'll see a different attitude and
the Democrats have lost
registered Democrats.
And and what happened immigration this
immigration push and how tough he got on
immigration is the greatest cover he
could ever ask for because he says did
you like what you had? That's what
you'll get and we've got and where the
Democrats could have said listen, we
made a mistake. We made a mistake on the
border. We want to work with the
president but we want him to work with
us on legal immigration. I don't want to
get too much on a tangent on immigration
but immigration you're right has been an
enormous failure of Congress. I mean
there has not been immigration reform
for a very long time and that has
allowed
both parties actually in different ways
to make it into
an issue that they campaign on they
use to sway people. Obama used it with
the DACA
issue and we're seeing President Trump
use it 2013 what happened in 2013? I'm
going to have let me let me say that
John Boehner you need to talk to John
Boehner. Why I didn't go on the floor?
This is the issue. There's always a
reason why it doesn't go on the floor
and there's always a reason why it
doesn't get resolved but that that is
the actual question here again coming
back to this idea of you know when
things have really moved in the Senate
it's because a party has said we're
going to put all of our power behind
this issue whether it be Obamacare or or
or something else and we're going to
make this a priority for us or am I
wrong about that? You could make the
alternate argument which I would make
with Obamacare that swung too far and if
you look at the next election I mean the
Democrats got clocked took the
shellacking that you know, President
Obama famously said because I think that
was moving too far. They shouldn't have
tried to just push it through even with
60. They should have got a few
Republican votes and and and had a
better product in the end.
So I I don't know that
that Do you believe that estimation will
solve you know, it's it's interesting
because
now today the Affordable Care Act is one
of the like I mean it's very popular.
People like it and it I I strongly
support it. But there's an element here
of accountability
because what I mean by that is that the
Democrats passed it with a bare you
know, with 60
and then you could argue if you didn't
agree with that legislation we got held
accountable because people saw what we
did
and they told us what they thought. A
lot of times I think that the filibuster
and the rules of the Senate broadly mask
that accountability because you you can
advocate for something but you never
actually get it done and then you're
never really held accountable for what
you're advocating for and as a result
nothing ever really changes but what
happens is you have these like
passionate arguments on Fox News and
MSNBC about what you really wanted to do
if only the other side had let you.
>> I find it astonishing that we're still
having this discussion so many years
after after it passed. No one wants to
fix it. They just want to talk about and
defend it. The Affordable Care Act was
basically a piece of pretty important
insurance reform. It didn't you know,
>> [clears throat]
>> it it it changed the rules around how
insurance companies could provide
insurance and what they had to do.
And but it never really got at the core
underlying problem which is that health
care costs too much in this country and
there's Do you take those Senator
Flake's point that it would have been
better legislation if they would have
waited some more and talked to
Republicans or do you think nothing
would have happened at all?
Well, I mean it's so hard for me to know
because I wasn't there in the moment and
I always am of the mind you you know, if
you try to figure out what is the best
possible thing that you can do and if
you can do it and trying to do that in a
bipartisan way is always I think the
right approach if you can if you can put
it together but you know, how long do
you have to wait before you can get to
the the you know, get to the bipartisan
[clears throat]
agreement if you see something that you
think is really going to be good. I
think you have to do it. I want to end
with this question about how much power
um
the the Senate has right now because
as you've discussed they've ceded
control over tariffs but also over
foreign affairs. I mean there's uproar
over the double tap strike on a boat
allegedly carrying drugs
um and we've seen a group of Democratic
lawmakers
send a video message to the military
urging them to ignore illegal orders.
There are Marines and Navy ships in the
Caribbean now. I mean do you feel like
the Senate's response to the very real
questions about
what we're doing in and around Venezuela
is sufficient and why isn't there more
oversight? Why isn't there more
questioning of something again that was
a core purview of the Senate?
That's that's been the frustrating
thing. Um
Yeah, I do think that this double tap
strike the second strike particularly if
that video is released. I mean there
will be revulsion I think on most
Americans' part. Sure they want a strong
response on drugs but you can have that
with some kind of humanity as well and
this wasn't it and so I I do think that
that's coming but it has been
frustrating because in all areas of
foreign policy whether it's tariffs
whether it's war powers
whether it's support for Ukraine.
There's a bill in the Senate now with 85
co-sponsors that the Senate could if it
wanted to assert itself
pass that veto proof bill and there's
sufficient votes in the house too but
they just haven't because they're afraid
of what the president can do to them.
The bottom line is is it Pete Tex Seth?
I think so. Someone need to ask them
your commander-in-chief the president
said he wanted to he like people to see
the see the second the rest of the
video.
Have do you not take that seriously or
you're not obeying the
your commander-in-chief? Would you like
to see the senators do more? from both
parties? Sure they have to do more both
parties. The senators have to do their
job. There's not another body can fix
this. The house is not going to fix it.
Okay, forget about that. It's the Senate
can fix it. The Senate can write the
ship.
And it can if it does its job and they
have to come to the grips that are they
waiting for another election to see
what's going to happen in the midterms
or is it so serious right now we just we
just need to do something and I'm
praying to God that we can put the
politics aside and reach across for the
sake of the country and do the right
thing and and
we'll see if that happens. You miss it?
Not at all.
And the reason I don't miss it is from
the standpoint I could tell that I could
get more done on the outside and I can
on the inside. I've been there for a
long time in the Senate for almost 15
years tried everything humanly possible
to make those changes. So I think I can
maybe give a little voice to that from
this side better than I could from the
inside.
Now I miss some things. I miss the
people. Oh yeah, we miss that. Oh yeah.
Like I said I I didn't want to leave. I
wanted to stay another. I didn't get
defeated but I knew that in order to win
re-election I would have to change who I
was and say things that I didn't
believe. So what's an unvarnished truth
that you weren't able to say then that
you could say now? Um well
I can say that most of my former
colleagues don't don't agree with the
policies they're pursuing
on tariffs and foreign policy and this
Venezuela stuff. They don't they don't
He's correct. Um they the political
incentives are not aligned with them to
speak truth to power here. That's that's
the bottom line. Like I said I think
that's shifting but as of now
you know, re-election is a strong pull.
>> [music]
>> I want to thank you so much for your
time. This has been really enlightening.
I really appreciate it. Thank you all
again Senator Flake, Senator Smith,
[music] Senator Menendez.
>> Thank you Lulu. Thank you. Yeah.
I'm Lulu Garcia [music] Navarro. And I'm
David Marchese. And we're the hosts of
the interview an audio and video podcast
[music]
from The New York Times. Every week we
interview fascinating and influential
people from all walks of life. Subscribe
to our YouTube channel so you'll never
miss an episode.